Installation Instructions for
 ODRPACK95 1.00 -- Software for Weighted Orthogonal Distance Regression


 Direct questions to

      Layne T. Watson
      Department of Computer Science (0106)
      Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
      Blacksburg, VA 24061

      e-mail:  ltw@cs.vt.edu
      phone:   (540) 231-7540




 *** FILES INCLUDED

 The ODRPACK95 distribution contains several Fortran source files (
 *.f), a make file (makefile), a user's guide (guide.ps),
 a readme file (readme), a change log (changes), and some
 input data (data?.dat) for some example problems (drive?.f).
 The default make target builds ODRPACK95, compiles the example and
 test problems (test.f), and runs the example and test problems.
 The files containing the results of the examples and tests are named
 like the source files that generated them with a .out extension.
 Some BLAS/LINPACK routines are used by ODRPACK95 and are contained in 
 lpkbls.f in case the user's system does not already have the BLAS/LINPACK
 routines installed.  The user or installer must manually select usage of
 a local BLAS/LINPACK package or the routines in lpkbls.f by editing
 makefile.  Lastly, the file real_precision.f contains
 a Fortran KIND definition for the real precision to use (IEEE 64-bit
 arithmetic is the default, note that changing the REAL KIND will require
 compatible BLAS and LINPACK).


 *** INTRODUCTION

 ODRPACK95 is a portable collection of Fortran subprograms for fitting
 a model to data.  It is designed primarily for instances when the
 explanatory as well as the response variables have significant errors,
 implementing a highly efficient algorithm for solving the weighted
 orthogonal distance regression problem, i.e., for minimizing the sum
 of the squares of the weighted orthogonal distances between each data
 point and the curve described by the model equation.  It can also
 be used to solve the ordinary least squares problem where all of the
 errors are attributed to the observations of the dependent variable.
 File CHANGES identifies how the current version of ODRPACK95 differs from
 earlier releases.

 ODRPACK95 is written in Fortran as defined in the 1997 standard
 (ISO/IEC 1539-1 1997), commonly called Fortran 95.


 *** INSTALLING ODRPACK95

 The following describes the necessary steps for installing ODRPACK95.
 On most UNIX systems, simply invoking the command

    make

 will result in the creation of object files containing the ODRPACK95
 code, and the execution of all of the test problems.  On other systems,
 the installer will need to proceed with the installation "by hand" or by
 editting the supplied makefile.


 Step 1:  Select ODRPACK95 Code Necessary for Installation on the Target System

 The code for ODRPACK95 is separated into three sections to facilitate
 installation.  These three sections are in files odr.f, lpkbls.f,
 and real_precision.f.

   *  File odr.f includes all subprograms written especially for
      ODRPACK95.  The module ODRPACK95 with the user callable ODR
      subprogram is listed first, followed by the remaining subprograms
      listed in alphabetical order.  The code in these files should not
      require any modification unless the installer wishes to customize
      the user callable subprograms.

   *  File lpkbls.f includes the subprograms used by ODRPACK95
      from the public domain packages LINPACK and BLAS, also listed in
      alphabetical order.  The installer can use local versions of these
      packages if available.  This would be particularly beneficial
      if the installer's machine has specially optimized versions of
      LINPACK or BLAS.

   *  File real_precision.f includes the definition of the REAL type format used
      throughout odr.f and lpkbls.f.  The user may change the REAL type format
      in this file to suit their needs.  Again, if the installer already has a
      version of real_precision.f, then they may wish to use their version.

 Each ODRPACK95 subprogram follows the SLATEC Source File Format and provides a
 standardized prologue describing the purpose of the subprogram and what other
 subprograms are called, an alphabetical list of all variables referenced by
 the subprogram and how they are used, as well as comments explaining the major
 sections of the code.  Furthermore, each ODRPACK95 subprogram begins with a
 comment line consisting of an asterisk followed immediately by the subprogram
 name, i.e., *name.


 Step 2.  Compile ODRPACK95 Code

 Edit the supplied makefile to specify the command for your compiler and any
 options you wish to use.  Then run the make command.

 ODRPACK95 code conforms to the ISO/IEC 1539-1 1997 full Fortran standard
 and has been successfully installed and tested on the following platforms and
 compilers:

    Architecture    Compiler                Operating System
    -------------------------------------------------------------
    Intel Xeon      G95 06-23-2006          Linux 2.6.16 (FC4)
    Intel Itanium   Intel Fortran 95 8.1    Linux 2.6.4
    AMD Athlon      Lahey/Fujitsu 95 6.20a  Linux 2.6.14 (FC4)   
    Sun Sparc       Sun Fortran 95 6.2      SunOS 5.8
    PowerPC         IBM Fortran 95          Mac OS X
    PowerPC         Absoft v9.2             Mac OS X



 Step 3.  Test ODRPACK

 The ODRPACK95 supplied software includes drivers and data sets for
 running ODRPACK95.  There are four drivers for the code.

   *  Files drive1.f, drive2.f, and drive3.f each contain simple programs
      that users can modify to form their own ODRPACK95 drivers.  The data
      necessary to run these drivers are in files data1.dat, data2.dat
      and data3.dat; the reports generated by these drivers are shown
      in the Reference Guide (file guide.ps), Section 2.C.

      The names of the data file specified in the "OPEN" statement in these
      drivers are "DATA1", "DATA2", and "DATA3", respectively.  The data file
      name and/or the file name specified in the "OPEN" statement might have to
      be changed in order for the drivers to run properly on the target
      machine.

   *  File test.f contains a driver that exercises ODRPACK95's main
      features and can be used to verify that the installation was completed
      successfully.  The ODRPACK95 output generated by test.f when run on an
      Intel Xeon Workstation running Linux is listed in file test.txt.  No 
      data files are required for this driver.

      This program calls the ODRPACK95 user callable subprogram several
      times, with each call testing one or more features of the package.
      The results of each call are automatically compared to the results
      obtained by the authors with ODRPACK95 run on an Intel Xeon.
      The ODRPACK95 reports generated by this driver are written to
      files REPORT and SUMMARY.  (When using ODRPACK95's makefile, both
      REPORT and SUMMARY are copied to file test.out after execution
      of test.f.) By running this demonstration program and then
      comparing file REPORT with test.txt, the installer can easily
      ascertain whether the package is performing as it should.

      If the REPORT files indicate that the results generated by the target
      machine disagree significantly with the expected results, the installer
      should attempt to determine why.  The most common cause of
      disagreement between the computed results and the expected results is
      compiler "bugs".

      We suggest that the problem be investigated before accepting a
      questionable installation as adequate.  If you are unable to find
      the cause of the reported disagreement, please feel free to contact
      the developers at the address given above.


 Step 4.  Distribute ODRPACK95 documentation

 The ODRPACK95 User's Reference Guide is supplied in PostScript format
 in file guide.ps.  The ODRPACK95 documentation can be reproduced and
 distributed as necessary for local users.
